all right saster 2021 great to be back
great to be back
do you have this do you have this chart
do you have this chart
first pothole we're talking about here
i'm seen as a big problem in the
industry
for some reason our customers are buying
more than they're using from us
we're all in this like subscription
consumption economy we're selling seats
we're selling
uh we're selling gigs we're selling
leads we're selling contacts we're
selling features
and for some
reason our customers are only using 50
of what we're selling why
when i'm in the board meetings and we're
looking at this like it must be the the
product it must be the user experience
yeah but they're not even trying to use
the license
okay well it must be the onboarding
process it must be the csm's
no they're pitching it
they're doing a great job why
why are our customers only using 50
of what they bought and it's a big
problem because it doesn't make for a
very good retention conversation a year
later in fact it leads to
revenue contraction
why is it happening
we're using a comp plan from the 1980s
we're using a sales comp plan that was
invented in the 1980s
and it's causing our customers to
utilize their licenses at a lower rate
and it's causing revenue contraction
and so i i did a little innovation at
hubspot
and with a bunch of our portfolio
companies at stage two that i'll show
you
has worked in a very scalable way to get
this utilization up and get us back into
revenue expansion so a lot of these comp
plans
since the 80s we have compensated our
sales people more
for the first revenue from a customer
pretty logical
hard to get in the door
but easier to renew and expand once we
have a relationship
but look at what happens
in today's a subscription economy
consumption economy our customers like i
love your product i could see our entire
thousand employees using this but i
would just like to start with 10
licenses for this team to get it set up
and then we'll roll it out to the rest
of the company and what does the seller
say no
no
you need to buy licenses for the whole
company
why and they make up some bs thing it's
really because that's how i get paid
i get paid for the first revenue from
the account and because of that we we're
left with low license utilization and
we're left with revenue contraction
simple innovation
try paying them more for the expansion
revenue
revenue so when the buyer says i want to
start with 10 accounts and then we'll
roll out to the whole thousand they're
like perfect i'm gonna make more money
and your utilization goes up and you get
back into a revenue expansion mode
the beauty the gold mine for for sas
uh businesses
when i rolled this out at hubspot when
we're doing the crm
i told the reps i said hey folks uh i'm
gonna pay you 20 more
for expansion seats than for new seats
and the reps were like roberts you're so
stupid
they were like you know what i'm going
to do i have 100 seat account right now
in the pipeline i'm going to close five
seats this quarter and i'm going to get
the other 95 next quarter and i was like
beautiful that's exactly what i want
because when you sell those five
accounts you're not gonna lie you're
gonna tell the truth because you know
the money's made on the other 95 you're
going to set really good expectations i
don't want you to turn into csm but
you're going to watch that account
you're going to make sure that thing on
boards well
and then you're gonna get the 95 and
you're gonna get paid and guess what if
you sell that thing ron i only lose five
accounts
as opposed to most sellers are getting
the hundred counts and they churn and it
crushes us okay now this is all
connected the pricing model too
this is the the pricing model has to
feed this as well and then a lot of
board meetings were like hey you hit hit
sales and
second quarter you hit sales again great
we should raise prices
let's raise the prices
and the ceo is like
yeah maybe we should raise prices and
the vp of sales is psyched
yes let's raise the prices my whole
we're going to double our prices i need
to close half the number of customers
this is perfect
and no one's paying attention to what
this is doing to sales cycles close
rates and most of most importantly
our disruption risk
we are misaligning
our customers
with our product because of the pricing
model because we're raising the price
and it takes them so long
to equate that value the sales cycles go
up the close rates go down and the one
that we don't pick up on
is our disruption risk goes way up
our disruption risk goes way up
because now you're charging twenty 20
000 a month for this thing fine it works
for a couple quarters because you're the
only player in the court in the in the
category but you are a ripe target
for a bunch of hot shot engineers hill
and here in silicon valley to rebuild
your product and charge half the price
so be careful about raising your prices
unless you have a sustainable moat and
that's number three well what is a
sustainable mow how do i know if i have
a sustainable mow
because i asked like 10 engineers you
know founders we're talking about
investing this sounds awesome it's a
great market you're obviously very
talented you've got some great traction
can you tell me about your moat
how are you going to defend against the
competition
and they're like well we built this
awesome feature that everyone likes
and i'm like okay well
how long would it take the competition
to build that feature and copy it
because they're obviously going to find
out about it
and they'll say i don't know like three
months
and i'll be like well that's not a
sustainable mode that's a temp remote
so this begs the question what is a
what is a sustainable moat
and i can tell you like here's my little
test here's my little test is great
you're crushing it you're in the
category you're the only person in the
category
fine you want to consider raising prices
you want to have a good answer to mo
tell me this
imagine if five rock star engineers from
right around the corner maybe they're at
google or something
quit their jobs raise 10 million dollars
from sequoia which is happening all the
time right now and they reverse engineer
your product and sell it for half the
price do you still win
do you still win if so you have a
sustainable mo
well that sounds really hard that sounds
really hard and i'll tell you it's not
because of product features it's not
because of your support hotline it's not
because of how much you raised 20
million bucks it's not because of the
integrations you built
and the best work
that i've seen in this space was decades
ago with porter's five forces michael
porter anyone know porter's five forces
a couple mbas in the realm okay so let
me try to translate because he did this
decades ago and i'll translate his work
which i think is the best he's an hps
professor
translated to today's modern software
and sas businesses so network effect
the more people that use the product the
more valuable it is to all the users the
first phone sucked like who do you call
right but as we built and you know it
got better and better it's the same
thing with the stuff that's happening in
in social networks and marketplaces with
amazon et cetera that's a true network
effect in sustainable mode brand why do
we spend so much money money on our
armani shirt
right we build a brand and today if
you've read play
bigger then you know category creation
is a way to build a sustainable mode it
worked beautifully for us at hubspot we
were like listen we're going to invent a
word called inbound marketing and if it
fails the company will fail but if it
works we'll have a sustainable moat
because we'll own the first 10 pages of
google the conference the book the
linkedin network everything and it
worked and the competition copied us and
it just fed our demand
everybody can build a category read play
bigger and that's a sustainable mo
economies of scale if we're buying bulk
then we can buy it cheaper aws does this
right they buy servers cheaper than
anyone else and the big one right now is
ai
there's an economies of scale in terms
of more volume so let's let's pretend
we're selling gone.i o
all right so
let's say the five you know google
engineers quit and copy gan's product
and they go and try to sell it why do i
still win it's very simple
it's like yeah fine you can you can buy
that one for half the price but you know
they've only processed 100 000 sales
calls their algorithm is only that good
we have been in business for six years
we've processed five billion sales calls
so what do you want how important is the
software to you do you want the one that
process a hundred thousand or the one
that processed five billion
it's hard to catch that that's a
sustainable moat switching costs i don't
love but it's out there you know
obviously i don't know if does anyone
think they're paying too little for
salesforce you know they really crush it
here no offense they're rock stars
they're good friends they're investors
but they crush the switching costs and
hey toast congrats ipo last year they
have a little hardware software hybrid
beautiful the only time they had churn
was march of 2020 because of that
craziness and ever since then and every
time before then they had no churn
because of that hybrid
hardwood software combination so that
that's a true sustainable i don't love
it because it doesn't help you to win
evergreen deals it helps you keep people
and you can raise the price through
expansion
but it doesn't help you win evergreen
deals in fact it could work against you
if it gets out that you're gonna take
advantage of your customers on that the
other two are slightly less
well
distribution huge
and i know the women before uh talked
about plg that was fantastic i'm a huge
plg fan
in terms of sustainable money we kind of
talked about the last piece with the
pricing like calendly how do you how do
you disrupt calendly like it starts for
free imagine if they charge 10 000 a
month like we'd just be attacking it but
you start free slack zoom all these
folks it's beautiful right now the other
two like government policy and capital
requirements those are just in
in porter's work they're probably less
applicable to us but i mean it would
probably be hard to go after elon musk
and spacex right now like you're not
going to raise 20 million bucks and take
them on but hopefully that gives you an
example of sustainable mo and this is
our job as founder ceo is
we need to define that for the company
and sometimes as you grow don't work on
sustainable mode in my opinion it's
series a
but around series b and series c
build the moat
know what it is build the mo and
sometimes it comes at the expense of
growth and that's okay
if i had to choose between this year
building a great moat and only growing
80 percent or not building a moat and
growing 120 i'd choose the former i want
to build that mo okay
jesus more charts roberge i had a beer
at lunch it's like i can't handle this
what's going on in this one pothole four
pothole four
what is going on here
switch gears from the first three
what this means
the chart on the left
it shows that the better the sales
person is at hitting quota
and their their percentile on the team
the more likely they are
to get promoted to manager promote your
promote your top reps
but it also shows that the better they
are on the team the higher rank they are
as a sales rep the worst manager they
are
we've known this forever your top rep
does not make your top manager it does
not always make a good manager in fact
the stats show it mostly fails but so
many founders are like yeah tommy's been
with us forever
tommy's our top rep tommy does amazing
why don't we just promote tommy the
manager
and he'll hire eight other people and
teach him what he knows how to do it
sounds logical but it doesn't work
like the best athletes and the best
musicians and the best actors don't
always make the best coach and that's
what's true in sales as well
is sales management is about hiring
talent and coaching talent it doesn't
have a lot to do with sales
so what do you do
promote your worst rep
you can't do that
so what do you do
so robert is saying you can't promote my
top rep to manager i need a manager
well you got to put him through a
process right so it's like okay fine you
want to be manager here's what we're
going to do
um
you just hit your quota for six months
in a row hit your quarter for two
quarters in a row you don't need to be
number one you just need to hit your
quota
no one's going to respect you if you
can't hit a quota so just hit your quota
then i'm going to put you through
a leadership development
course you know this i built this when
we were only like 5 million in revenue
it's like it it sounds like a lot but
it's just like i picked out
i picked out like a bunch of subjects
like managing conflict and building team
spirit and and
delivering negative feedback these are
the things that a manager needs now i
built this 12 years ago there's better
readings out there but this will give
you like the sense of what you need to
do and i had them just read this 10 page
ebook and then we did a role play for
half an hour of like hey imagine one of
your reps is furious because some other
rep just sold a deal that they've been
working on for three months how do you
handle it
thank gosh we role played all those
scenarios because all of those happen
the first week on the job and i just
want to see how they do it
and then the last thing i'm going to do
is i'm like great
you've been hitting your quota
you uh
you've gone through this and it seems
like you like to do this stuff
what i wanted you to do now is hire the
next salesperson we have a higher coming
up next month you're going to make the
hire you're still going to carry your
quota not forever i hate the team lead
hybrid carry you know carry your own
personal quota and run a team that
doesn't work but just for like two or
three months you're gonna make the hire
you're gonna tell me what you think
after the interview so i know how how
you interview and they're gonna coach
them for two or three months to see if
you're good at it you're probably going
to mess up but it's a lot it's a lot
better to just mess up with one person
than eight people
right so if you like it and you do well
then we'll promote you and so we had a a
a pipeline of people vying for
management i would tell you that less
than half the people that got into the
program
became a manager and most of the time
because they opted out themselves like i
don't really want to do this
i just want to stay salesperson and we
had a huge success rate through that
model with our management layer which is
so critical during scale now the other
complement to this i don't know why more
folks don't use this compensation plan
what about the people that do want to
stay as manager i mean as a salesperson
they should be able to get promoted even
though they're not going to manager so
we just set up a
uh like uh a way to do that you know you
come in you're making 80k a year as a
junior sales person with 5 000 stock
options and you're going to get promoted
when you sell a certain amount of
monthly recurring revenue install base
was probably going to take you anywhere
between seven months and 18 months to do
it
and you need to average your quota above
your quarter for three months in a row
and then i'll promote you and i'll give
you a bump in your variable and i'll
give you more stock options and there's
the next goal it's crazy that we do
these annual reviews for sales people
for such a a metrics driven
success or failure function this is like
we can just use a promotion path and
sales people love this they obsess with
this and you can you can alter the right
hand side to be aligned with your
strategy this is an example for an sdr
team that's the hardest job sdr 12 day
month 18 months a cold calling if you're
lucky you get one appointment a day holy
cow what a hard job
but this is six tiers that they go
through every two or three months
graduating up to a county executive
school and it's very motivating for that
22 year old sdr okay
i'll post these slides i'll tell you at
the end and so if you didn't get it you
can take a look at it all right now five
and six five and six i think are causing
more failure in sas than any of the
other ones
and number five is scaling before we're
ready when are we ready to scale when
are we ready to scale
i ask a hundred founders when are you
ready to scale they all say when we have
product market fit great
thanks to eric reese and lean startup
beautiful answer the problem is
you ask them what is product market fit
you get 100 different answers and half
the answers are about revenue
i have product market fit when i have a
million in revenue i could not disagree
more
that's market message fit
congratulations you know how to sell it
doesn't mean your product works
so it's like we gotta work on this
product market fit definition and know
when to scale
and so i know like um some some people
say it's like well you just know there's
a lot of pull on the market like it just
feels too squishy for me for such an
important strategic question
i do like sean ellis's model he says if
you survey your customers and 40 say
they'd be very disappointed if your
product didn't exist then you're a
product market fit i actually really
like that it's about the product
experience and whether it's
you know it's delivering on the value
but i do i don't like surveys they're
just riddled with uh soft false
positives
so for me the metrics customer attention
you know if someone used your product
and buys it again
i feel like we have product market fit
the problem is it takes like a year to
figure that out
and so
i love customer attention as a proxy to
product market fit but it's a lagging
indicator
so what we encourage is
to create a leading indicator of
retention that is the key metric for you
in the scale up mode to know when you're
going to scale
what can you see in your customers
behavior in the first month
that if it happens
they'll be with you forever
and if it doesn't happen they're going
to churn
all right so the way i think about it is
in this format if p percent of customers
do e-event and t-time then you have
product market fit
okay so slack right if two if seventy
percent of our customers
send two thousand team messages in the
first month
then we have product market fit it's
beautiful
online i don't talk to the slack people
i think it's pretty close to what
actually happened i mean imagine if the
founder of slack stood up and say our
first north star metric is a million in
revenue
which happens a lot or imagine if they
stood up and said our first north store
metric northstar metric is to get 70 of
our customers to send 2000 t messages in
the first month
that's beautiful
that's a beautiful company i'd love to
build a sales team on that company okay
dropbox back up your device in one hour
hubspot we we've we caught this late at
like 10 million in revenue our churn was
not good and we ran 50 permutations and
found out that if if um if our customers
use five or more features in the
platform in the first two months the
retention rate is like 97
and if they don't the retention rate is
like 50
wow we found something beautiful about
our business okay so i'll post this
here's a couple of guidelines on how to
think about defining that as you can see
it differs with each per with each
company but it's definitely something
that's factual like not not a csm saying
they're in good shape that's too
subjective but it has to be a very
measurable instrumentable
event because we're gonna we're gonna
measure this forever we're gonna measure
this forever because it's gonna break
okay so you can check that out and i
like to have them occur in about the
first month if possible you know if
you're doing a big enterprise workday
type thing it'll take a couple months
and if you're doing a real plg dropbox
then it'll take hours but something at
least in the first month
and then finally on this piece here's
how i like to measure it
is i like to measure it in customer
acquisition cohorts so i can pick up on
product market fit as early as possible
so what this shows is let's say let's
use the slack example this isn't their
data but let's just use it
so this company let's say slack acquired
24 customers in the early days in
january
after one month only three percent had
hit the lead indicator retention had
said 2000 t messages
after two months 27
after six months only 39 had sent 2000
team messages in a month
that is not good if you're a
collaboration software so they made a
bunch of changes to how they sell to
their product to their onboarding and
look at how that improved just look down
the month two column
in january only 27 percent of those
customers they signed up had hit the
leading kid of retention and sent to
2000 t messages but by september 68 had
done it
they have product market fit
and it's not because some subjective
thing or some random arr number it's
because of their data and the success of
their customers
so that's how i think about product
market fit now are you ready to scale
yeah i don't think so
because notice that i didn't really
mention anything about uni economics and
scale yet i believe that we have to
tackle our customer attention and
success first then focus on unit
economics not do them at the same time
david cancel the founder of drift they
just had their exit two weeks ago
sold only for a billion dollars these
days oh my gosh um so
so he did this beautifully in the early
days
like he was literally on an airplane
flying to onboard customers that were
paying him 50 a month that is beautiful
behavior at the product market fit stage
it is so hard to get your customers to
realize the value of product and he was
doing that as founder doesn't scale but
throw everything in the kitchen sink at
making this happen
and don't talk we don't need to talk
about scalable demand gender pricing
models or compensation we're just trying
to get 80 of our customers to do this
event
so are we ready to scale when that
happens no
we have to prove all we've shown now is
that
if we're gonna sign up a hundred
customers in this quarter or 10 or 20
customers in this quarter we know that
most of them are going to see the value
of our product
but we don't know if we can sell them at
a cac low enough to offset the ltv
so we have to think about
scalability uh and and profitability and
we usually talk about that in sas of uni
economics
right so pick your pick your poison the
magic number payback period ltv to cac
i'm going to use ltv to cac
okay so fine we want our ltv to cac to
be greater than three
all right so but like what does that
mean like i can't tell a 26 year old
account executive hey uh your job is to
make an ltv the cat greater than three
like they don't know what to do
so we have to extract this back to
actionable
activities that they understand like the
price per customer or the close rate on
a lead it's not that hard to do i mean
we can take lifetime value and it's just
how much they pay us times the gross
margin divided by the churn rate so
there you go what is our average sale
and the cac that's just the marketing
cac plus the sales cac
and the marketing cac is just our cost
per lead divided by the close rate
and our sales cap is just how much we
pay our reps divided by the number of
customers they sell and the number of
customers they sell is just the number
of
leads we give each rep and what the
close rate is so now i've extracted this
like very hard to conceptualize unit
economics thing of ltv to cat greater
than three and extracted it back to
stuff that's meaningful and we have a
business model we can actually put that
together and say hey if we're average
sales twenty thousand dollars and our
cost per lease a thousand we close five
percent of them we have a business
and i can operations this into our
dashboards as long as the blue line
stays above the red
we're
we're able to scale our unit economics
are going to spit out great
and this particular framework gives us
direction
about what we we should work on now now
we do need to build the sales playbook
we didn't need it during the product
market fit stage we do need to get our
compensation model right and our pricing
model right we didn't need it during the
product market fit phase for the fit
stage so we can figure out what in
sequence we should be working on whether
you're starting a new company or rolling
a new product out in a bigger company
okay
now
now we know when we can scale we can
scale when we have product market fit
and go to market fit attacked in
sequence
and we have data on our
business
to know if we're able to scale
okay now the other one the biggest one
the biggest killer and the last one
is how fast to scale
pothole number six
how fast should we scale
because i hear this all the time these
are real stories
every quarter i hear another one
you know hey mark yeah it's uh it's
september 27th
you know this summer we had a good
summer we have 20 people in the company
i think there's like 12 there's 12
engineers there's a couple product
managers there's three sales people
there's a marketer there's a customer
success manager and we crushed it
and we just raised a series a
15 million bucks
great
and so what'd you do we hired 20 sales
people
oh god
what is that bad yeah you're gonna fire
20 sales people in like a year
like are you kidding me do you know what
it takes to hire 20 sales people in a
month do you know how many interviews
that is and how are you going to feed
them with demand and who's going to
manage them the average rep to manage
ratio inside sales is eight to one now
you would need overnight you need three
managers
are you kidding me why'd you do that now
you know the answer
it's because they negotiated this huge
round like the huge valuation and they
showed the
vc investor the triple triple double
double and they actually bought it and
gave them the 70 million valuation and
now they're like oh my gosh now we have
to do it let's hire a bunch of sales
people all at once
it's not good it kills company it's it's
the number one killer
so how fast should we scale
all right let's not think about hiring
as this lump sum hiring at the beginning
of a fiscal year at the at the right
after funny round let's establish a pace
we are now ready to scale because we
have product market and go to market fit
let's establish a pace let's hire two
reps every other month let's do that for
six months
and let's watch what this becomes which
is our speedometer this is our
speedometer it's going to break i
guarantee you from zero to a billion
this will break
and when it does you know very early
because most companies out there
deciding if we're scaling too fast or
too slow are looking at the quarterly p
l at the board meeting and the quarterly
p l is what happened nine months ago
this is what's happening today
so you know more than your peer you know
about your business nine months faster
than your peers so good hire two reps
every other month and watch the
speedometer if it stays green hire two
reps every month do it for six months if
it stays green hire four reps a month
for six months if it stays green hire
eight reps a month for six months
congrats to your unicorn
and you did it in a very scientific way
okay that's the final pothole there um
and you can use uh you know not only
does this framework help you understand
the sequence of bringing a new product
to market whether it's in a big company
or small but it helps you understand
what to focus on a couple of things here
so yeah i started a vc firm three three
years ago called state shoe capital my
my co-founder jpo
formerly from bessemer is out there
it's the first vc firm running back by
sales marketing and customer success
leaders
so you can see there the cro cmo co of
atlassian zoom snowflake octa santa tula
we have 250 of them that have backed us
we look for companies that are around a
million in revenue we don't really care
how fast you're growing we care more
about your customer attention and your
customer engagement i love to help a
company that's having trouble scaling
sales but has amazing customer success
okay so probably a little different than
most of the investors out there
if you want to download some of the
stuff here a lot of this stuff is in
this 45-8 page ebook i wrote on the
website these slides i just posted on my
linkedin profile so if you want to go to
my linkedin profile you can click
through download these slides and get
these links and i know a lot of you have
sent me notes of like
the book i wrote a couple years back
thank you for the support there
just note that a hundred percent of the
proceeds are donated to build.org anyone
involved in build
oh it's an awesome organization they
start out here they basically team up
with the worst performing high schools
in every major city kids that probably
didn't have the beginnings that we had
and they teach them entrepreneurship in
their freshman year and they put them
through a four-year program to try to
get them through high school and into
college and 99 of the kids graduate
which is way higher than regular heist
their regular graduation rate i think 85
percent
go into uh college so if you support the
book you're supporting them
thank you for that jason thank you for
an amazing platform enjoy the show stay
safe everyone
[Music]
you